---
layout: post
title:  "My Time at the Recurse Center"
date:   2018-08-25 09:04:38 -0600
authors: Sid Shanker
categories: rc
---

I just finished up my three-month batch at the [Recurse Center](https://recurse.com),
one of the most mind-expanding experiences of my adult life.

# What is the Recurse Center?

The Recurse Center is a computer science education program in New York that you can
join for either one, six, or 12 weeks. It's really unlike any other environment
out there--unlike school, there are no teachers, no grades, no tests, no curriculum, and there isn't a piece of paper
that you get at the end. When you start, it's up to you to figure out how you want to spend
your time. You have to decide what it is that you care to learn and the best way to do that.

It's awesome. Unlike school or work, there isn't any extrinsic motivation. People
at RC aren't here trying to make money (although it is a great way to get a job),
get a diploma, look cool, or anything else tangential to learning.

And I think because of that it fills a big gap. In adult life,
it's very easy to not let yourself follow your own curiosity, and even worse,
forget how. The environments that we're in train us to think of learning in terms
of punishment and reward, and I've found that the older I get, the more averse I've gotten
to being "bad" at something, which is an essential property of learning anything new.

Colleges and schools often make big promises about students becoming "life-long learners".
I think that attending RC has made it clear to me what that means. It's about letting
yourself be bad at things, letting yourself follow your own curiosity rather than
what is "cool" or "hip" in the moment, and also importantly, knowning how and
when to ask for help.

# What did I do?

I had two main things that I wanted to get out of RC this batch, getting a better
handle on machine learning, and understanding how computers work at a lower level. I married these
two things with a project to apply machine learning to some software system. I started
reading about TCP and decided to take on the problem of congestion control. I spent most of my batch
implementing various solutions to congestion control.

I also worked a smattering of fun projects with other RC'ers:

* An SSH Implementation in C
* Image compression with the Discrete Cosine Transform
* A DNS Resolver in Rust
* Solutions to "dining philosopher" in Rust
* The first four levels of the 2012 Stripe CTF

I did a bunch of blogging (13 posts in total), and people particularly seemed to like:

* 
*
* 

I discovered through work of other people in my batch things I hadn't really thought about before:

* Processing! Really cool framework for generating cool graphics
* Digital Archiving -- had some awesome conversations about this with Nat about
cloning old video games to run on modern hardward/software

# Broader Lessons

So on the surface, I learned a lot about computer networks, and got pretty decent at machine learning.

Those are far from the most important

##  What activities are best for learning?

## Collaborating Effectively

## This is going to take a long time

# Advice for future recursers

Everyone who attends RC has a pretty different experience, but here are
some tips that are generally applicable.

In Zulip, RC's chat system, there's a "checkins" channel. **Post in it 
frequently**. If you ever have moments where you think "Damn, where did the
last week go?", you can always look back at your check-ins. It's also a
good way to communicate to everyone else what you're up to.

There are also talks held every Thursday. **Try to speak at these on a fairly
regular cadence** (I signed up every other week). They're a great way to improve
your public speaking skills in a low stress environment, and to force yourself
to explain that work you've been doing in a simple way.

## Blogging

Blog, and try to blog on a fairly regular cadence. There are a lot of benefits:

1. Blogging about the work that you're doing really forces you to understand more
rigorously what it is that you and did and what you're talking about. I don't have
research on-hand to back this up but just speaking from personal experience, my retention
on knowledge that I've written about is way higher. Plus, you get a nice reference
that you can read if you're ever interesting in revisiting the material!

2. It's  a great way to improve your writing skills. RC has a "writing review"
channel (I haven't taken advantage of it yet), which is an awesome way to get feedback.

3. It allows others to learn from the awesome work you've done.

It can be hard to start. The two main thought patterns that I had to overcome were:
"what do I possibly have to write about?" and "somebody else has almost certainly written about this".
Getting over these was a process of remember that pretty much any experience you've had
where you had to do some work to learn something is an opportunity for a blog post, and
also remembering that even if something has been written about before, explaining something
in a slightly different way or with slightly more detail can make a huge difference to
somebody who is struggling to learn a concept.

# What's next?

Alright, now that I've "Never Graduated", what's next? RC has solidified my desire
to be a really great programmer. I've got a long way to go, but think
I have a better idea of what it's going to take to get there.

I'd like to close off with a big thank you to the RC facilitators (Sonali, Nick, Dave, Rachel, James, Alicia, Sydney) for making this a thing,
and to the whole RC community for being so welcoming, active, and fun.
