---
layout: post
title:  "Weeks 2-4 at the Recurse Center"
date:   2018-06-14 12:00:38 -0400
categories: rc
---

_See [this post](http://squidarth.com/rc/2018/05/29/rc-week-1.html) for a recap of week 1,
or if you're interested in finding out more about [RC](https://recurse.com)._

As you might have gleaned from my last post, RC is pretty unique
environment, and it takes a lot of work to figure out what to make of it.
I think I'm starting to get the hang of how to spend my time effectively here.

# What did I do in weeks 2-4?

My main focus for this batch is figuring out how to use machine
learning to improve computer networking protocols. I don't have
a particular deep background in either domain, so the last couple
weeks have largely been about getting ramped up. I also made pair programming a priority,
which has been an awesome way to stay productive and get to know
other RC-ers better.

* Started learning Rust, and ended up writing a bunch of blog posts, (people really seemed to like [this one](http://www.squidarth.com/rc/rust/concurrency/2018/06/09/rust-threads-detach.html). Had a couple good pairing sessions with Henry where
we got started with the basics, and with Kevin, where we worked on solving some [problems in concurrency](https://github.com/data-pup/dining-philosophers)
* Made [this PR](https://github.com/m-labs/smoltcp/pull/234) in smoltcp, a userspace TCP library written in Rust. Required
reading a bunch of Linux kernel code (documented what I learned [here](https://github.com/m-labs/smoltcp/issues/83#issuecomment-396406078)).
* Started building an ["ssh" implementation](https://github.com/squidarth/LSSH) in C with Elad
* Rory and I started building a DNS Resolver in Rust
* Built a [procedural map generator](https://github.com/egeromin/FakeMaps) with Emanuel and Zach as part of the RC art jam
* Spent some time learning about how NATs work and gave a [talk](https://slides.com/sidshanker/deck#/) about it
* Attended a couple linear algebra sessions  

I spent a bunch of time at the machine learning study group trying
to better understand neural networks better. This
ended up not feeling super productive, so I've dropped that for now.
Since we've started working on different projects, Jenn, Nick and I
ended up disbanding the group.

In the process of working on these projects, I've learned
a lot about what projects/learning techniques work best.  

# When does the learning happen?

My goal for a bunch of these projects has been fairly
nebulous--"understand computer networks better". My hope
was that by picking a few different protocols to implement
I would get a better understanding for how those protocols
work and get more used to the vocabulary of computer
networking. However, through working on these projects,
my perspective on what it means to understand computer
networks has changed. Rather, I care a lot less about whether
I understand every acronym and protocol I come across in networking documents,
and a lot more about whether I trust myself to solve interesting
problems in computer networks.

This is a problem I've been thinking about in the context of math
for a while. Math textbooks typically have a chapter of content
followed by a bunch of exercises that demonstrate concepts in
the previous chapter. Being able to successfully complete these
exercises probably means that you understand that particular chapter
well. However, it doesn't necessarily mean that you are equipped
to contextualize it and use it in a "real" problem presented outside
of the context of that chapter. In other words, it doesn't necessarily
mean that your mathematical problem-solving ability has improved.

The nice thing about programming is that any task you pick up
is an opportunity to be a better practitioner of your programming
language, or improve your debugging ability. However, not all
projects require doing the work that makes you better
at problem solving in a particular domain.

## An example

The "ssh" implementation I worked on with Elad ended up
being a fantastic exercise for learning about networks,
and is one I would highly recommend to anybody trying
to get better at systems programming.

We decided pretty early on to not actually implement the
official ssh spec, since it would take forever and mostly
not be that interesting. Our goal was to build software
to accomplish the same task and allow a client to remotely
execute bash commands on another machine, with all communication end-to-end
encrypted.

We're building this in C and took the approach of on the server
waiting for incoming connections, and when a connection is made
to `fork` off a new process and execute bash. The original
process will read data from the socket, pass it along to the `bash` process,
and then take the output of the `bash` process and pass it back to the socket.

One of the problems we encountered while working on this was figuring out
how to handle bash commands that don't produce any output. This ended up being complicated because we
were writing to the bash process using `write`, and then immediately calling
`read`. If a command like `cd ..` was run, this doesn't produce any output,
and the `read` blocks indefinitely.

Working through this problem was challenging, and we ended up cycling
through a couple different solutions, none of them perfect.
This ended up requiring us to learn a lot more than we were expecting about
Linux syscalls and concurrency, and in the process I think we gained a much
better intuition for what kinds of solutions are possible for problems
like this. 

## Takeaway

It wasn't obvious to me that I would learn that much about networks
in the process of building this project. I knew from the start
that we would "simply" be using the C socket APIs to communicate
between the server and client, APIs that I've used before. This
actually led me to being a little hesitant about embarking
on this in the first place, because I wasn't sure I would learn
that much new about any real networking protocols in the process
of doing this.

However, if framed differently, and instead of asking if this will
help me learn the details of any networking protocol, asking if
the project will make me better at solving problems in computer
networks, this ended up being a pretty ideal project.

It's hard to predict what projects will have moments like this--you
only really discover them once you've started making progress on a
certain project. That being said, I definitely feel a lot better about
the time that I spent than I would have if I had instead spent my time
reading the details of different protocols. 

This is a big shift from other educational environments I've been in.
In college, there is a big focus on comprehensiveness--a lot of courses
have a list of a material that they aim to cover in some short amount of time.
It's easier to assess and measure what people learn when you are
judging on understanding some fixed canon of material. However, now I think
that striving for comprehensiveness isn't really worth it--especially if
it's at the cost of not doing projects that can really further intuition and
problem-solving ability.

# My aversion to re-learning things

In addition to getting better at understanding computer networks,
I've also been focused on understanding machine learning (ML) algorithms.

We decided at our ML study group to break off and start working on
individual projects. I started out initially by deciding to build
a classifier using Tensorflow, but didn't feel super satisified
using these libraries without actually having a good intuition for
how the algorithms work. To that end,
I ended up watching a bunch of 3Blue1Brown videos and reading
this great [page on matrix calculus](http://explained.ai/matrix-calculus/index.html).

However, I think I was fundamentally hamstrung by the fact that
I don't have the sharpest calculus and linear algebra fundamentals.

It's interesting that that's case, given that I've tried many times
and failed to make any progress learning ML. I think one of my problems
here is that I tell myself that I "know" calculus and linear algebra
already, since I took classes on these in school, and it feels like
a shameful waste of time to have to revisit these and do the work again.
Life is too short to take linear algebra twice!!

I'm realizing now that this a silly mentality to have, and
that having such a strong aversion to "re-learning" things is
getting in the way of me of actually learning these important concepts.
The root cause of this is probably all the time I've spent in Silicon Valley
startups obsessed with speed (Not that this
is a bad thing, just not a great mindset for learning math properly).

Machine learning is full of hard concepts,
and that it's going to take time to fully grasp them. Peter Norvig's ["Learn Programming in 10 Years"](http://norvig.com/21-days.html)
post I think sums this up well--expecting to be able to learn
hard concepts in short, expedited periods of time is a little
foolish.

Will definitely be spending some time shoring up my knowledge
on these more fundamental areas of math. Some of this also
applies to thinking about other domains too--you are never
"done" learning, and covering material you've dealt with
can still be an extremely valuable experience.

# Thinking like a programming language designer

I also spent a bunch of time in the last couple weeks
learning a new programming language, Rust. I'm still
getting used to common idioms and approaches in the language,
but I've made a bunch of a progress towards getting comfortable
with it.

One of the fun things about being at RC is that there are a lot
of folks interested in programming languages and PL-design in general,
and this has definitely had an impact on how I think about learning
new languages. One fellow RC-er in particular, Adam, who's been
spending a bunch of time implementing the [SKI combinator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SKI_combinator_calculus)
in different statically-typed languages, inspired me to be rigorous
about the capabilities of languages. Rather than just thinking about the
"happy paths" in a programming language and focusing on the idioms in common frameworks
like Ruby on Rails, I've made a more concerted effort to learn
about the "edges" of the language. For a statically-typed language like Rust,
what are the possibilities of the type system and how complex a type can you express?
With the ownership/borrow system, are there any approaches that can break
the guarantees that the language makes?

# What's next?

In the next couple weeks, I have two main priorities--starting to make some progress
on my primary project of using ML to generate congestion control algorithms in TCP,
and doing some projects to further my knowledge of calculus and linear algebra.

I'm also excited to pair with Lucy this coming week on a [FFT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fast_Fourier_transform)-related project, and to finish up the DNS resolver and SSH implementation that I've been working on with Rory
and Elad.

Thanks for reading and making it this far! Stay tuned for more random musings on
getting better at programming.
